---
title: Fields
description: Configure specific fields of your form
---

Nuxt Auto Form uses the [config](./config) by default to detect the proper components for each field
Sometimes, however, you may need to override this, customize labels, descriptions, or other properties.

## Background

Nuxt Auto Form leverages [Zod 4’s metadata system](https://zod.dev/metadata) component that wraps each input.
You can use the `meta()` function to attach additional configuration to any Zod field.

## `FormField` Customization

Fields below are used to customize the [FormField](https://ui.nuxt.com/components/form-field) component wrapping each field.
They map directly to properties inside `UFormField` Nuxt UI component.

::field-group
  ::field{name="title" type="string"}
    Field label displayed in the form's label row. Maps directly to `UFormField.label`.\
    If not provided, it defaults to the field name with capitalization and spaces.
  ::

  ::field{name="required" type="string"}
    Marks the field as required in the UI (asterisk, aria-required).
    ::warning
      Validation is not enforced here; use `zod` refinements for that.
    ::
  ::

  ::field{name="description" type="string"}
    Supporting text displayed between the label and the input control
  ::

  ::field{name="hint" type="string"}
    Short inline hint shown next to the label.
  ::

  ::field{name="help" type="string"}
    Help text displayed below the input field.
  ::

  ::field{name="i18n" type="boolean"}
    Intend to use `$t` function of `vue-i18n` to translate `title`, `description`, `hint`, and `help` texts.
  ::
::

## Input customization

Use the `input` property to customize the actual input component:

```ts-type
input?: {
  component?: string | Component
  props?: Record<string, any>
}
```

You can use it to override default properties or even replace the default component with a custom one.

::caution
If you use string to define the component it **must** be [globally registered](https://nuxt.com/docs/4.x/guide/directory-structure/app/components#dynamic-components) to work.
To do this, name your component with the `.global.vue` suffix, or place it in `components/global/` directory.
::

## Styles

You can customize the appearance of form fields:

```ts-type
/** Auto-form specific configuration */
theme?: {
  /** Float the input box to the right of the label */
  floatRight?: boolean
  wFull?: boolean
}
```

## Example

::component-preview{name="Fields"}
