---
title: <AutoForm/>
description: The most important component of Nuxt Auto Form.
---

The `<AutoForm/>` component is **the core** of Nuxt Auto Form.
It automatically generates a form based on your Zod schema, so you don’t have to manually define inputs, validations, or state.

## Customization

You can customize the form using the following options:

- [Config](/customization/config) - modify default components and module settings
- [Fields](/customization/fields) - customize the rendering, title, and description of individual fields
- [SubmitButton](/customization/submit_button) - customize the submit button appearance and behavior
- [Slots](/customization/slots) - create fully custom input fields for maximum flexibility

## Properties

### `schema` (required)

The Zod schema that defines your form structure and validation rules.
You can include metadata for fields such as labels, descriptions, and placeholders.

See [Customization / Fields](/customization/fields) documentation for more information.

```ts
import * as z from 'zod'

const schema = z.object({
  name: z.string().meta({ title: 'Not name' }),
})
```

## `config`

Use this prop to override default Nuxt Auto Form configuration.
See more [here](/customization/config).

```vue
<!-- Change the submit button label -->
<AutoForm
  :schema="schema"
  :config="{ submit: { props: { label: 'Confirm' } } }"
/>
```

### `initialState`

Set default values for your form fields, which is especially useful for edit forms or prefilled forms.

Unlike `UForm`, where you always had to manually define state, `<AutoForm/>` automatically manages form state for you.
`initialState` lets you override defaults when needed.

It has type `Partial<z.InferInput<T>>`{lang="ts-type"}, where `T` is your Zod schema type.

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
const state = {
  age: getAge(data.value.birth_year),
  ...data.value,
}
</script>

<template>
  <AutoForm :schema="schema" :initial-state="state" />
</template>
```

::tip
You can use it to pre-fill the form with existing data, where for example
you want to provide submit or edit form feature.
::

## Emits

### `@submit`

Emitted when the form is submitted and **all validations pass**.

The event payload contains the form data with type `z.infer<typeof schema>`{lang="ts-type"}.

```vue
<AutoForm
  :schema="schema"
  @submit="(data) => console.log(data)"
/>
```

::warning
Compared to `UForm` it returns form values directly, not wrapped in an event object.
Check the [migration guide](/getting-started/migration) for more details.
::

## Exposed methods

Currently `<AutoForm/>` exposes only one method: `submit()`, which programmatically triggers form submission.
You can access the following methods by using `ref` on the `<AutoForm/>` component.

```vue
<script setup lang="ts">
const formRef = useTemplateRef('form')
</script>

<template>
  <UButton @click="formRef?.form?.submit()" />
  <AutoForm ref="formRef" :schema="schema" />
</template>
```

## Slots

Use slots to override individual fields or inject custom content inside the form.
See [Slots](/customization/slots) for details

```vue
<template>
  <AutoForm :schema="schema">
    <template #text-hint>
      This is a hint for the text field.
    </template>
  </AutoForm>
</template>
```

## Examples

::note
For real world use cases, checkout out the [Hack4KrakSite](https://github.com/search?q=repo%3AHack4Krak%2FHack4KrakSite%20AutoForm&type=code) project.
::

### Complex real world example

::component-preview{name="RealWorld"}

### Custom slots & modals

::component-preview{name="Qr"}
